
# Survey of Cryptographic Key Recovery Methods

Authors: Ryan Grant, Christian Lundkvist, Kim Hamilton Duffy, Heather Vescent, Drummond Reed, Kyle Den Hartog, Dan Pape

## Abstract
This is a record of a discussion occurring over a fixed amount of time (90 minutes), in which we surveyed different approaches to decentralized cryptographic key recovery, including their benefits and limitations. We considered social aspects of key recovery mechanisms, including priorities and values that may influence which agents an individual may trust in key recovery.  The group did not discover a new method for recovery, and instead discussion settled on the sensibility of m-of-n social recovery, and the reasons that uPort and Evernym have concentrated on these.  Both Christian and Drummond are working on papers that describe their schemes in more detail, to be published before IIW.  

## Outline
- Social aspects
    - Drummond showed word cloud generated by survey asking individuals which person or organization would they trust to store their secret keys. The largest word was GOOGLE. Absent was the word Facebook. 
    - Cultural and generational norms affect leaning towards individuals versus institutions. For example, Eastern social concept is more towards a collective identity, while Western/US social concept is towards an individual identity. 
    - The idea of social recovery is very new and non-technical people may be slow to adopt it.
    - Heather pointed out that people from younger generations may be more accepting of the idea of sharing secrets with their friends.
    - What does it culturally/emotionally mean when you decide who to be your recovery delegates? What is the emotional overhead of selecting which of your friends to hold these roles and what does it say about your relationship with them?
- Generalized architecture: 
    - In abstract, when considering "trustees" or “recovery delegates” that can be humans, institutions, etc., the idea of social recovery is sound.  Challenges involve each individual thinking through which trustees they would be comfortable with.
    - Individuals can mix agents
- What has been tried
    - Social key sharing/recovery
    - Vault (offline cold storage).  This is simplest for implementations to start with.
- Dan brought up the idea of time-based recovery
    - Similar to “dead man’s switch” idea
    - If a certain amount of time passes, maybe based on an event (i.e., six months since lost logged into gmail), then recovery keys are sent to friends/delegates
    - Ryan bought up a paper by Ron Rivest: Time Capsule Crypto Puzzle
- Pros/cons of approaches
    - Shamir secret sharing key recovery
        - no clear standard
        - several implementations have had subtle bugs
    - Best practices with smart contracts (minimizing code complexity, keeping recovery DIDs out of public sight).
    - Someone set up an Ethereum smart contract that implements a dead-mans-switch.  If the contract does not get a periodic update, it will send its value to a predetermined destination.
- Christian's test of Facebook social recovery
    - Work ahead of time: Set up five friends (Three might work too).
    - At moment of deciding to recover: Recoveree reveals prior knowledge of name of one friend.
    - Friends get sent a link (fb.com/recover).
    - Friend sees pin, sends back out of band (such as via phone call).
    - 2fa still required (FB provides no recovery method if you have lost it, so make copies!)
- Christian asked about Drummond's distinction between cloud layer and edge layer.  This is part of the to-be-released DKMS paper. Edge devices can maintain an encrypted backup in the cloud.  Cloud agents are security neutral because all they're ever doing is passing encrypted messages (they only ever leak metadata, which one tries to minimize).

## Conclusion

This digital insurance policy is a new idea. Culturally, people need to begin thinking through their trustees delegated to effect a recovery.

